

The Earth 
Our Habitat
Social  Science
ISBN 81-7450-491-5
0656
             Textbook in Geography
             for Class VI



THE EARTH IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM
How wonderful it is to watch the sky after sunset! One
would first notice one or two bright dots shining in
the sky. Soon you would see the number increasing.
You cannot count them any more. The whole sky is
filled with tiny shining objects – some are bright, others
dim. It seems as if the sky is studded with diamonds.
They all appear to be twinkling. But if you look at
them carefully you will notice that some of them do
not twinkle as others do. They simply glow without
any flicker just as the moon shines.
Along with these bright objects, you may also see
the moon on most of the days. It may, however, appear
at different times, in different shapes and at different
positions. You can see the full moon only once in about
a month’s time. It is Full moon night or Poornima. A
fortnight later, you cannot see it at all. It is a New
moon night or Amavasya. On this day, you can watch
the night sky best, provided it is a clear night.
Do you wonder why can’t we see the moon and all
those bright tiny objects during day time? It is because
the very bright light of the sun does not allow us to see
all these bright objects of the night sky.
The sun, the moon and all those objects shining in
the night sky are called celestial bodies.
Some celestial bodies  are very big and hot. They
are made up of gases. They have their own heat and
light, which they emit in large amounts. These celestial
bodies are called stars. The sun is a star.
Countless twinkling stars in the night sky are
similar to the sun. But we do not feel their heat or
light, and they look so tiny because they are very very far
from us.
1
1
Let’s Do
You’ll need : 1 torch,
1 sheet of plain
paper, pencil and a
needle.
Step :
1.Place the torch in the centre
of the paper with its glass
front touching the paper.
2.Now draw a circle around
the torch.
3.Perforate the paper with the
needle within the circled
area.
4.Now place the perforated
circle part of the paper on
the glass front and wrap the
paper around the torch
with a rubber band.
5.Take care that the switch
of the torch is not covered.
6.In a dark room, stand at
some distance facing a
plain wall. Switch off all
other lights. Now flash the
torch light on the wall. You
will see numerous dots of
light on the wall, like stars
shine in the night.
7.Switch on all the lights in
the room. All dots of light
will be almost invisible.
8.You may now compare the
situation with what happens
to the bright objects of the
night sky after the sun rises
in the morning.
2018-192018-19

2
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Figure 1.1 : Saptarishi and the
North Star
You must have noticed that all
objects look smaller when seen from a
distance. How small an aeroplane looks
when it is flying at a great height!
While watching the night sky, you
may notice various patterns formed by
different groups of stars. These are
called constellations. Ursa Major or
Big Bear is one such constellation. One
of the most easily recognisable
constellation is the Saptarishi (Sapta-
seven, rishi-sages). It is a group of seven
stars (Figure 1.1) that forms a part of
Ursa Major Constellation. Ask someone
elder in your family or neighbourhood
to show you more stars, planets and
constellations in the sky.
In ancient times, people used to
determine directions during the night
with the help of stars. The North star
indicates the north direction. It is also
called the Pole Star. It always remains
in the same position in the sky. We can
locate the position of the Pole Star with
the help of the Saptarishi. Look at
Figure 1.1. You will notice that, if an imaginary line is
drawn joining the pointer stars and extended further,
it will point to the Pole Star.
Some celestial bodies do not have their own heat
and light. They are lit by the light of the stars. Such
bodies are called planets. The word ‘planet’ comes from
the Greek word “Planetai” which means ‘wanderers’.
The earth on which we live is a planet. It gets all its
heat and light from the sun, which is our nearest star.
If we look at the earth from a great distance, say the
moon, it will appear to be shining just as the moon.
The moon that we see in the sky is a satellite. It is a
companion of our earth and moves round it. Like our
earth, there are eight other planets that get heat and
light from the sun. Some of them have their moons too.
THE SOLAR SYSTEM
The sun, eight planets, satellites and some other
celestial bodies known as asteroids and meteoroids
Interesting Fact
Jupiter, Saturn and
Uranus have 
rings
around them. These
are belts of small debris.
These rings may be
seen from the earth
with the help of powerful
telescopes.
2018-192018-19

3
THE EARTH IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM
1. MERCURY
-One orbit around sun - 88 days,
One spin on axis - 59 days.
2. VENUS
-One orbit around sun - 255 days.
One spin on axis - 243 days
3. EARTH
-One orbit around sun - 365 days.
One spin on axis - 1 dayNumber of moons - 1
4. MARS
-
One orbit around sun - 687 daysOne spin on axis - 1 day,number of moons - 02
5. JUPITER
-
One orbit around sun - 11 years, 11months about 12 years. One spin onaxis - 9 hours, 56 minutes, number ofmoons - about 53
6. SATURN
-
One orbit around sun - 29 years, 5months. One spin on axis - 10 hours 40minutes, number of moons - about 
53
.
7. URANUS
-
One orbit around sun - 84 years. Onespin around axis - 17 hours 14 minutes,number of moons - about 27.
8. NEPTUNE
-
One orbit around sun - 164 years.One spin on axis-16 hours 7minutes, number of moons - 13.
Inner planets
 -
 very close to the sun. They are made up
of rocks.
Outer Planets 
- V
ery-very far fr
om the sun and ar
e huge planets made up of gases and liquids.
Figure 1.2 : The Solar System
Saur
ce: https://planetar
ynames.wr
.usgs.gov/Page/Planets
2018-192018-19

4
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
form the solar system. We often call it a solar family,
with the sun as its Head.
The Sun
The sun is in the centre of the solar system. It is huge
and made up of extremely hot gases. It provides the
pulling force that binds the solar system. The sun is
the ultimate source of heat and light for the solar
system. But that tremendous heat is not felt so much
by us because despite being our nearest star, it is far
away from us. The sun is about 150 million km away
from the earth.
Planets
There are eight planets in our solar system. In order of
their distance from the sun, they are: Mercury,
Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and
Neptune.
An easy way to memorise the name of the planets in
order of their distance from the sun is:
M
YVERYEFFICIENTMOTHER JUSTSERVEDUSNUTS.
All the eight planets of the solar system move
around the sun in fixed paths. These paths are
elongated. They are called orbits. Mercury is nearest
to the sun. It takes only about 88 days to complete
one round along its orbit. Venus is considered as
‘Earth’s-twin’ because its size and shape are very much
similar to that of the earth.
Till recently (August 2006), Pluto was also
considered a planet. However, in a meeting of the
International Astronomical Union, a decision was
taken that Pluto like other celestial objects (Ceres, 2003
UB
313
) discovered in recent past may be called
‘dwarf planets.”
The Earth
The earth is the third nearest planet to the sun. In
size, it is the fifth largest planet. It is slightly flattened
at the poles. That is why, its shape is  described as a
Geoid. Geoid means an earth-like shape.
Word Origin
Many words used
in a language may
have been taken
from some other language.
Geography, for example, is
an English word. It has its
origin in Greek, which
relates to the description
of the earth. It is made of
two Greek words, ‘ge’
meaning’ ‘earth’ and
‘graphia’ meaning ‘writing’.
Find out more about the
earth.
Do you know?
‘Sol’ in Roman
mythology is
the ‘Sungod’.
‘Solar’ means
‘related to the sun’. The
family of the sun is,
therefore, called the solar
system. Write down as
many words using the word
solar on your own as you
can.
Do you know?
Humans have
always been
fascinated gazing at the night
sky. Those who study the
celestial bodies and their
movements are called
astronomers. Aryabhatta
was a famous astronomer of
ancient India. He said that
the moon and the planets
shine due to reflected
sunlight. Today, astronomers
all over the world are busy
exploring the universe.
2018-192018-19

5
THE EARTH IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM
Conditions favourable to support life are probably
found only on the earth. The earth is neither too hot
nor too cold. It has  water and air, which are very
essential for our survival. The air has life-supporting
gases like oxygen. Because of these reasons, the earth
is a unique planet in the solar system.
From the outer space, the earth appears blue
because its two-thirds surface is covered by water. It
is, therefore, called a blue planet.
The Moon
Our earth has only one
satellite, that is, the
moon. Its diametre is
only one-quarter that of
the earth. It appears so
big because it is nearer to
our planet than other
celestial bodies. It is
about 3,84,400 km away
from us. Now you can
compare the distance of
the earth from the sun
and that from the moon.
The moon moves around the earth in about 27 days.
It takes exactly the same time to complete one spin. As
a result, only one side of the moon is visible to us on
the earth.
The moon does not have conditions favourable for
life. It has neither water nor air. It has mountains,
What do animals and
plants require in order
to grow and survive?
Figure 1.3 : The moon as seen from
the space
Do you know?
Light travels at
the speed of
about 300,000
km per second.
Yet, even with this speed,
the light of the sun takes
about eight minutes to
reach the earth.
Interesting Fact
Neil Armstrong was
the first man to
step on the surface
of the moon on 21 July
1969. Find out whether
any Indian has landed on
the moon?
A Satellite is a celestial
body that moves around
the planets in the same
way as the planets move
around the sun.
A Human-made Satellite
is an artificial body. It is
designed by scientists to
gather information about
the universe or for
communication. It is
carried by a rocket and
placed in the orbit around
the earth.
Some of the Indian
satellites in space are INSAT,
IRS, EDUSAT, etc.
Figure 1.4 : Human-made Satellite
Rocket launchRocket falls back to the EarthSatellite enters orbit
?
?
2018-192018-19

6
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
plains and depressions on its surface. These cast
shadows on the moon’s surface. Look at the full moon
and observe these shadows.
Asteroids
Apart from the stars, planets and satellites, there are
numerous tiny bodies which also move around the
sun. These bodies are called asteroids. They are found
between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter (Figure 1.2).
Scientists are of the view that asteroids are parts of a
planet which exploded many years back.
Meteoroids
The small pieces of rocks which move around the sun
are called meteoroids. Sometimes these meteoroids
come near the earth and tend to drop upon it. During
this process due to friction with the air they get heated
up and burn. It causes a flash of light. Sometimes, a
meteor without being completely burnt, falls on the
earth and creates a hollow.
Do you see a whitish broad band, like a white
glowing path across the sky on a clear starry night? It
is a cluster of millions of stars. This band is the Milky
Way galaxy (Figure 1.6). Our solar system is a part of
this galaxy.  In ancient India, it was imagined to be a
river of light flowing in the sky. Thus, it was named
Akash Ganga. A galaxy is a huge system of billions of
stars, and clouds of dust and gases. There are millions
of such galaxies that make the Universe. It is difficult
to imagine how big the universe is. Scientists are still
trying to find out more and more about it. We are not
certain about its size but we know
that all of us – you and I belong to
this universe.
Figure 1.5 : Asteroid
Figure 1.6 : Milky Way
2018-192018-19

7
THE EARTH IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM
1.Answer the following questions briefly.
(a)How does a planet differ from a star?
(b)What is meant by the ‘Solar System’?
(c)Name all the planets according to their distance from the sun.
(d)Why is the Earth called a unique planet?
(e)Why do we see only one side of the moon always?
(f)What is the Universe ?
2.Tick the correct answer.
(a)The planet known as the “Earth’s Twin” is
(i) Jupiter(ii) Saturn(iii) Venus
(b)Which is the third nearest planet to the sun ?
(i) Venus(ii) Earth(iii) Mercury
(c)All the planets move around the sun in a
(i)  Circular path(ii) Rectangular path(iii) Elongated path
(d)The Pole Star indicates the direction to the
(i)  South(ii) North(iii) East
Can you relate yourself with
the universe now? You are on
the earth and the earth is a
part of the solar system. Our
solar system is a part of the
Milky Way galaxy which is part
of the universe. Think about the
universe, and the fact that it
contains millions of such
galaxies. How do you fit in the
picture?
2018-192018-19

8
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
(e)Asteroids are found between the orbits of
(i) Saturn and Jupiter(ii) Mars and Jupiter(iii) The Earth and Mars
3.Fill in the blanks.
(a)A group of ________ forming various patterns is called a ________.
(b)A huge system of stars is called________.
(c)________is the closest celestial body to our earth.
(d)________is the third nearest planet to the sun.
(e)Planets do not have their own________ and ___________________.
1.Prepare a chart of the solar system.
2.During a vacation visit a planetarium and describe your experience
in the class.
3.Organise a quiz contest on the earth and the solar system.
1.The sun is commonly known as Soorya or Sooraj in Hindi, Find out its
name in different languages of our country. Take help of your friends,
teachers and neighbours.
2.You might have heard that people make human chains and run for world
peace etc. You can also make a human solar system and run for fun.
Step 1:All children of your class can play this game. Assemble in a big
hall or on a playground.
Step 2:Now draw 8 circles on the ground as shown in the figure drawn on
the opposite page.
Use a 5-metre long rope. Mark at every half a metre with a chalk or
ink. Place a small nail to mark the centre. Now hold one end of
the rope at the central position. Ask your friend to hold a chalk
at the ½ metre mark and move around the nail holding rope and
chalk together on the ground.
You have drawn one circle just as you do on paper using a compass
and a pencil. Draw other circles in the same manner.
Step 3:Prepare 10 placards. Name them as Sun., Moon, Mercury, Venus,
Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune.
2018-192018-19

9
THE EARTH IN THE SOLAR SYSTEM
Step 4:Select 10 children in the following order and give each one of them
a placard.
Order of placard distribution
The Sun - tallest, The moon - smallest;  Mercury, Mars, Venus and Earth
(almost equal heights); Neptune, Uranus, Saturn and Jupiter taller than
the earlier four planets but smaller than the Sun.
Now ask the children holding placards to take their places with the Sun in
the centre in their orbits. Ask the child holding the moon placard to keep
the hand of the child holding the earth placard always.
Now your Solar System is almost ready to go into action.
Now make everybody move slowly in the anti-clockwise direction. Your class
has turned into a small human replica of the solar system.
While moving on your orbit you can also turn around. For everybody the
spin should be anti-clock wise except for Venus and Uranus who will make
the spin in the clock-wise direction.
2018-192018-19

Figure 2.1 : Globe
Let’s Do
Take a big round
potato or a ball.
Pierce a knitting
needle through it. The
needle resembles the axis
shown in a globe. You can
now move the potato or the
ball around this axis from
left to right.
GLOBE : LATITUDES AND LONGITUDES
2
2
In the previous chapter, you have read that our planet
earth is not a sphere. It is slightly flattened at the
North and the South Poles and bulge in the middle.
Can you imagine how it looks? You may look at a
globe carefully in your classroom to get an idea.
Globe is a true model (miniature form) of the earth
(Figure 2.1).
Globes may be of varying size and type – big ones,
which cannot be carried easily, small pocket globes,
and globe-like balloons, which can be inflated and are
handy and carried with ease. The globe is not fixed. It
can be rotated the same way as a top spin or a potter’s
wheel is rotated. On the globe, countries, continents
and oceans are shown in their correct size.
It is difficult to describe the location of a point on a
sphere like the earth. Now the question arises as to
how to locate a place on it? We need certain points of
reference and lines to find out the location of places.
You will notice that a needle is fixed through the
globe in a tilted manner, which is called its axis. Two
points on the globe through which the needle passes
are two poles – North Pole and South Pole. The globe
can be moved around this needle from west to east
just as the earth moves. But, remember there is a major
difference. The real earth has no such needle. It moves
around its axis, which is an imaginary line.
Another imaginary line running on the globe divides
it into two equal parts. This line is known as the
equator. The northern half of the earth is known as
the Northern Hemisphere and the southern half is
known as the Southern Hemisphere. They are both
2018-19

11
GLOBE : LATITUDES AND LONGITUDES
Figure 2.2 : Latitude
Figure 2.3 : Important Latitudes and Heat Zones
Do you know?
By measuring
the angle of the
Pole Star from
your place, you can know
the latitude of your place.
equal halves. Therefore, the equator is an
imaginary circular line and is a very
important reference point to locate places
on the earth. All parallel circles from the
equator up to the poles are called parallels
of latitudes. Latitudes are measured in
degrees.
The equator represents the zero degree
latitude. Since the distance from the
equator to either of the poles is one-fourth
of a circle round the earth, it will measure
¼
th
 of 360 degrees, i.e. 90°. Thus, 90
degrees north latitude marks the North
Pole and 90 degrees south latitude marks
the South Pole.
As such, all parallels north of the
equator are called ‘north latitudes.’
Similarly all parallels south of the equator are called
‘south latitudes.’
The value of each latitude is, therefore, followed by
either the word north or south. Generally, this is
indicated by the letter ‘N’ or ‘S’. For example, both
Chandrapur in Maharashtra (India) and Belo
Horizonte in Brazil (South America) are located on
parallels of about 20° latitude. But the former is 20°
north of the equator and the latter is 20° south of it.
We, therefore, say that Chandrapur is
situated at 20° N latitude and Belo
Horizonte is situated at 20° S latitude.
We see in Figure 2.2 that as we move
away from the equator, the size of the
parallels of latitude decreases.
IMPORTANT PARALLELS OF LATITUDES
Besides the equator (0°), the North Pole
(90°N) and the South Pole (90° S), there
are four important parallels of latitudes–
(i) Tropic of Cancer (23½° N) in the
Northern Hemisphere. (ii) Tropic of
Capricorn (23½° S) in the Southern
Hemisphere. (iii) Arctic Circle at 66½°
north of the equator. (iv) Antarctic
Circle at 66½° south of the equator.
2018-19

12
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Figure 2.4 : (b)
Torch-light falling on a slanted
surface is less bright but covers a
bigger area.
Figure 2.5 : Longitudes
Figure 2.4 : (a)
Torch-light falling on a straight
surface is bright and covers a
smaller area.
HEAT ZONES OF THE EARTH
The mid-day sun is exactly overhead at
least once a year on all latitudes in
between the Tropic of Cancer and the
Tropic of Capricorn. This area, therefore,
receives the maximum heat and is called
the Torrid Zone.
The mid-day sun never shines
overhead on any latitude beyond the
Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of
Capricorn. The angle of the sun’s rays
goes on decreasing towards the poles. As
such, the areas bounded by the Tropic
of Cancer and  the Arctic Circle in the
Northern Hemisphere, and the Tropic of
Capricorn and the Antarctic Circle in the
Southern Hemisphere, have moderate
temperatures. These are, therefore, called
Temperate Zones.
Areas lying between the Arctic Circle
and the North Pole in the Northern
Hemisphere and the Antarctic Circle and
the South Pole in the Southern
Hemisphere, are very cold. It is because
here the sun does not  rise  much above
  the horizon. Therefore, its rays are
always slanting and provide less heat.
These are, therefore, called Frigid
Zones (very cold).
WHAT ARE LONGITUDES?
To fix the position of a place, it is
necessary to know something more
than the latitude of that place. You
can see, for example, that Tonga
Islands (in the Pacific Ocean) and
Mauritius Islands (in the Indian
Ocean) are situated on the same
latitude (i.e., 20° S). Now, in order to
locate them precisely, we must find
out how far east or west these places
are from a given line of reference
running from the North Pole to the
South Pole. These lines of references
are called the meridians of longitude,
2018-19

13
GLOBE : LATITUDES AND LONGITUDES
Figure 2.6 : Grid
Figure 2.7
Let’s Do
Draw a circle.
Let the Prime
meridian divide
it into two equal halves.
Colour and label the
eastern hemisphere and
the western hemisphere.
Similarly draw another
circle and let the equator
divide it into two halves.
Now colour the Northern
hemisphere and Southern
hemisphere.
and the distances between them are measured in
‘degrees of longitude.’ Each degree is further divided
into minutes, and minutes into seconds. They are semi-
circles and the distance between them decreases
steadily polewards until it becomes zero at the poles,
where all the meridians meet.
Unlike parallels of latitude, all meridians are of equal
length. Thus, it was difficult to number the meridians.
Hence, all countries decided that the count should
begin from the meridian which passed through
Greenwich, where the British Royal Observatory is
located. This meridian is called the Prime Meridian.
Its value is 0° longitude and from it we count 180°
eastward as well as 180° westward.  The Prime Meridian
and 180° meridian divide the earth into
two equal halves, the Eastern Hemisphere
and the Western Hemisphere. Therefore,
the longitude of a place is followed by the
letter E for the east and W for the west. It
is, however, interesting to note that 180°
East and 180° West meridians are on the
same line.
Now look at the grid of the parallels of
latitude and meridians of longitude on the
globe (Figure 2.6). You can locate any point
on the globe very easily if you know its
latitude and longitude. For example,
Dhubri in Assam is situated at 26° N
latitude and 90° E longitude. Find out the
point where these two lines cut each other.
That point will be the location of Dhubri.
To understand this clearly draw equidistant vertical
and horizontal lines on a paper (Figure 2.7). Label the
vertical rows with numbers and horizontal rows with
letters, draw some small circles randomly on points
where these horizontal and vertical lines intersect each
other. Name these small circles as a, b, c, d and e.
Let vertical lines represent East Longitudes and
horizontal lines as North Latitudes.
Now you will see that circle ‘a’ is located on B
° 
N
latitude and 1
°
 E longitude.
Find out the location of other circles.
2018-19

14
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Figur
e 2.8 : T
ime zones of the W
orld
2018-19

15
GLOBE : LATITUDES AND LONGITUDES
LONGITUDE AND TIME
The best means of measuring time is by the movement
of the earth, the moon and the planets. The sun
regularly rises and sets every day, and naturally, it is
the best time-keeper throughout the world. Local time
can be reckoned by the shadow cast by the sun, which
is the shortest at noon and longest at sunrise and
sunset.
When the Prime Meridian of Greenwich has the sun
at the highest point in the sky, all the places along
this meridian will have mid-day or noon.
As the earth rotates from west to east, those places
east of Greenwich will be ahead of Greenwich time and
those to the west will be behind it (Figure 2.8). The
rate of difference can be calculated as follows. The earth
rotates 360° in about 24 hours, which means 15° an
hour or 1° in four minutes. Thus, when it is 12 noon
at Greenwich, the time at 15° east of Greenwich will be
15 × 4 = 60 minutes, i.e., 1 hour ahead of Greenwich
time, which means 1 p.m. But at 15° west of Greenwich,
the time will be behind Greenwich time by one hour,
i.e., it will be 11.00 a.m. Similarly, at 180°, it will be
midnight when it is 12 noon at Greenwich.
At any place a watch can be adjusted to read 12
o’clock when the sun is at the highest point in the
sky, i.e., when it is mid-day. The time shown by such
a watch will give the local time for that place. You can
see that all the places on a given meridian of longitude
have the same local time.
WHY DO WE HAVE STANDARD TIME?
The local time of places which are on different
meridians are bound to differ. For example, it will be
difficult to prepare a time-table for trains which cross
several longitudes. In India, for instance, there will be
a difference of about 1 hour and 45 minutes in the
local times of Dwarka in Gujarat and Dibrugarh in
Assam. It is, therefore, necessary to adopt the local
time of some central meridian of a country as the
standard time for the country. In India, the longitude
of 82½° E (82° 30
'
E) is treated as the standard
meridian. The local time at this meridian is taken as
the standard time for the whole country. It is known
as the Indian Standard Time (IST).
Figure 2.9 : Indian Standard Meridian
2018-19

16
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
1.Answer the following questions briefly.
(a)What is the true shape of the earth?
(b)What is a globe?
(c)What is the latitudinal value of the Tropic of Cancer?
(d)What are the three heat zones of the Earth?
(e)What are parallels of latitude and meridians of longitude?
(f)Why does the torrid zone receive maximum amount of heat?
(g)Why is it 5.30 p.m. in India and 12.00 noon in London?
2.   Tick the correct answers.
(a)The value of the prime meridian is
(i) 90°(ii) 0°(iii) 60°
(b)The frigid zone lies near
(i) the Poles(ii) the Equator(iii) the Tropic of Cancer
(c)The total number of longitudes are
(i) 360(ii) 180(iii) 90
(d)The Antarctic circle is located in
(i)the Northern hemisphere
(ii)the Southern hemisphere
(iii)the Eastern hemisphere
(e)Grid is a network of
(i)parallels of latitudes and merdians of longitudes
(ii)the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn
(iii)the North Pole and the South Pole
Kabeer lives in a small town near Bhopal. He tells his friend Alok that they will
not be able to sleep tonight. A day and night cricket match between India and
England had started at 2 p.m. in London. This means that the match would begin
at 7.30 p.m. in India and finish well into the night. Do you know what is the time
difference between India and England?
India located east of Greenwich at 82
°
30
'
E is 5 hours and 30 minutes ahead of
GMT. So it will be 7:30 p.m. in India when it is 2:00 p.m. noon in London.
Some countries have a great longitudinal extent and so they have adopted
more than one standard time. For example, in Russia, there are as many as eleven
standard times. The earth has been divided into twenty-four time zones of one
hour each. Each zone thus covers 15° of longitude.
2018-19

17
GLOBE : LATITUDES AND LONGITUDES
3.Fill in the blanks.
(a)The Tropic of Capricorn is located at _________________.
(b)The Standard Meridian of India is ____________________.
(c)The 0° Meridian is also known as ____________________.
(d)The distance between the longitudes decreases towards___________.
(e)The Arctic Circle is located in the ____________ hemisphere.
1.Draw a diagram of the globe showing the earth’s axis, the Equator, Tropics
of Cancer and Capricorn, Arctic Circle and Antarctic Circle.
1.Draw and cut out six circles of the same size (approx. 3 cm. radius) from
cardboard. Mark diametres (NS, EW) and 23½
o
 angles on each face of the
circles as shown on the figure. Place the circle one on top of the other and
stitch along the line NS. Now there are twelve semi-circles. Let one semi-circle
represent 0
o
 or Greenwich Meridian (Prime Meridian). The 6
th
 semi-circle from
it will be the 180
o
 Meridian. Between the 0
o
 and 180
o
 there are 5 semi-circles
on both sides which are West and East longitudes 30
o
 apart. On two ends of
the stapled line stick pins to represent the North and South Poles.
A rubber band around the model touching the EW points will represent the
Equator. Two rubber bands touching the 23½
o
 points, South and North of
the EW points will represent the tropics.
2018-19

MOTIONS OF THE EARTH
3
3
Let’s Do
Take a ball to
represent the
earth and a
lighted candle to represent
the sun. Mark a point on
the ball to represent a
town X. Place the ball in
such a way that the town
X is in darkness. Now
rotate the ball from left to
right. As you move the ball
slightly, the town will
have its sunrise. As the
ball continues to move,
the point X gradually gets
away from the sun. This
is sunset.
Figure 3.2 : Day and Night on the Earth due to rotation
Figure 3.1 : Inclination of the Earth’s
axis and the orbital plane
As you know that the earth has two types of motions,
namely rotation and revolution. Rotation is the
movement of the earth on its axis. The movement of
the earth around the sun in a fixed path or orbit is
called Revolution.
The axis of the earth which is an imaginary line,
makes an angle of 66½° with its orbital plane. The
plane formed by the orbit is known as the orbital plane.
The earth receives light from the sun. Due to the
spherical shape of the earth, only half of it gets light
from the sun at a time (Figure 3.2). The portion facing
the sun experiences day while the other half away from
the sun experiences night. The circle that divides the
day from night on the globe is called the circle of
illumination. This circle does not coincide with the
axis as you see in the Figure 3.2. The earth takes about
24 hours to complete one rotation around its axis.
The period of rotation is known as the earthday. This is
the daily motion of the earth.
2018-19

19
MOTIONS OF THE EARTH
Figure 3.3 : Revolution of the Earth and Seasons
What would happen if the earth did not rotate?  The
portion of the earth facing the sun would always
experience day,  thus bringing continuous warmth to
the region. The other half would remain in darkness
and be freezing cold all the time. Life would not have
been possible in such extreme conditions.
The second motion of the earth around the sun in
its orbit is called revolution. It takes 365¼ days (one
year) to revolve around the sun. We consider a year as
consisting of 365 days only and ignore six hours for
the sake of convenience. 
Six hours saved every year are added to make one
day (24 hours) over a span of four years. This surplus
day is added to the month of February. Thus every
fourth year, February is of 29 days instead of 28 days.
Such a year with 366 days is called a leap year. Find
out when will the next leap year be?
From the Figure 3.3, it is clear that the earth is
going around the sun in an elliptical orbit.
Notice that throughout its orbit, the earth is inclined
in the same direction.
A year is usually divided into  summer, winter, spring
and autumn seasons. Seasons change due to the change
in the position of the earth around the sun.
Do you know?
The ancient Indian
astronomer Aryabhata
had stated that ‘the
earth is round and
rotates on its own axis’
2018-19

THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
20
Let’s Do
Do you know how to draw an ellipse? Take a pencil, two pins and a loop of
thread. Now fix these pins on a paper as shown in the figure. Put the loop
on the paper enclosing these two pins inside the loop. Now hold the pencil
and draw the line keeping the thread tight and moving the pencil along it. The
figure represents an ellipse.
Look at the Figure 3.3. You will see that on 21
st
June, the Northern Hemisphere is tilted towards the
sun. The rays of the sun fall directly on the Tropic of
Cancer. As a result, these areas receive more heat. The
areas near the poles receive less heat as the rays of the
sun are slanting. The North Pole is inclined towards
the sun and the places beyond the Arctic Circle
experience continuous daylight for about six months.
Since a large portion of the Northern Hemisphere is
getting light from the sun, it is summer in the regions
north of the equator. The longest day and the shortest
night at these places occur on 21
st
 June. At this time
in the Southern Hemisphere all these conditions are
reversed. It is winter season there. The nights are longer
than the days. This position of the earth is called the
Summer Solstice.
On 22
nd
 December, the Tropic of Capricorn receives
direct rays of the sun as the South Pole tilts towards
it. As the sun’s rays fall vertically at the Tropic of
Capricorn (23½° S), a larger portion of the Southern
Hemisphere gets light. Therefore, it is summer in the
Southern Hemisphere with longer days and shorter
nights. The reverse happens in the Northern
Hemisphere. This position of the earth is called the
Winter Solstice. Do you know that Christmas is
celebrated in Australia in the summer season?
On 21
st
 March and September 23
rd
, direct rays of
the sun fall on the equator. At this position, neither of
the poles is tilted towards the sun; so, the whole earth
experiences equal days and equal nights. This is called
an equinox.
On 23
rd
 September, it is autumn season in the
Northern Hemisphere and spring season in the Southern
Hemisphere. The opposite is the case on 21
st
 March,
Let’s Do
To understand
the earth’s
inclination in
the same direction, draw
a big ellipse on the ground
and take a flag with a
stick. Stand anywhere on
the line of the ellipse.
Point your flag to a fixed
point far away like on a
tree-top. Now move along
the ellipse keeping your
flag always pointing
towards that fixed point.
In this way, the axis of the
earth remains inclined
permanently in the same
position. The revolution of
the earth and the
inclination of the earth’s
axis in a fixed direction
cause seasons.
2018-19

21
MOTIONS OF THE EARTH
1.Answer the following questions briefly.
(a)What is the angle of inclination of the earth’s axis with its orbital plane?
(b)Define rotation and revolution.
(c)What is a leap year?
(d)Differentiate between the Summer and Winter Solstice.
(e)What is an equinox?
(f)Why does the Southern Hemisphere experience Winter and Summer Solstice
in different times than that of the Northern Hemisphere?
(g)Why do the poles experience about six months day and six months night?
2.Tick the correct answers.
(a)The movement of the earth around the sun is known as
(i)  Rotation(ii) Revolution(iii) Inclination
(b)Direct rays of the sun fall on the equator on
(i) 21 March(ii) 21 June(iii) 22 December
(c)Christmas is celebrated in summer in
(i) Japan(ii) India(iii) Australia
(d)Cycle of the seasons is caused due to
(i) Rotation(ii) Revolution(iii) Gravitation
3.Fill in the blanks.
(a)A leap year has _______________ number of days.
(b)The daily motion of the earth is _______________.
(c)The earth travels around the sun in ______________ orbit.
(d)The sun’s rays fall vertically on the Tropic of ___________ on 21
st
 June.
(e)Days are shorter during ___________ season.
when it is spring in the Northern Hemisphere and
autumn in the Southern Hemisphere.
Thus, you find that there are days and nights and
changes in the seasons because of the rotation and
revolution of the earth respectively.
2018-19

THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
22
1.Make a drawing to show the inclination of the earth.
2.Record the timings of sunrise and sunset at your place taking help from
your local newspaper on the 21
st
 of each month and answer the following :
(a)In which month are the days the shortest?
(b)In which months are the days and nights nearly equal?
1.Draw different shapes of ellipses by placing two pins nearer and farther
using the same loop of thread. Notice when the ellipse becomes circular.
2.On any sunny day, take a straight stick that is one metre long. Find out a
clean and level place on the ground. Place this stick into the ground where
it casts a distinctive (sharp) shadow.
Step (1):Mark the tip of the shadow with a stone or a twig or by any other
means. The first shadow mark is always towards the west. See
after 15 minutes and mark the tip of the shadow again. By then
it would have moved a few centimetres away. Now join the two
points and you have an approximate east-west line.
Step (2) :Stand with the first mark to your left and the second mark to
your right you are now facing north. This fact is true everywhere
on the earth because the earth rotates in west to east direction.
An alternative method is more accurate but requires more time. Set up your
shadow stick and mark the first shadow in the morning. Use a piece of
string to draw a clean arc through this mark around the stick. At mid-day,
the shadow will shrink or disappear. In the afternoon, it will lengthen again
and at the point where it touches the arc, make a second mark. Draw a line
through the two marks to get an accurate east-west line.
2018-19

MAPS
4
4
Let’s Do
Take an old
rubber ball and
draw whatever
you like all over it. You
may also mark north
pole and south pole on
it. Now cut this ball
with a knife and try to
flatten it. Notice how the
drawings are distorted.
You have learnt in the previous chapter about the
advantages of a globe. However, globe has limitations
as well. A globe can be useful when we want to study
the earth as a whole. But, when we want to study only
a part of the earth, as about our country, states,
districts, towns and villages, it is of little help. In such
a situation we use maps. A map is a representation or
a drawing of the earth’s surface or a part of it drawn
on a flat surface according to a scale. But it is
impossible to flatten a round shape completely.
We find that maps are useful to us for various
purposes. One map shows a small area and a few facts.
Another map may contain as many facts as a big book.
When many maps are put together we get an Atlas.
Atlases are of various sizes, measurements drawn on
different scales. Maps provide more information than
a globe. They are of different types. Some of them are
described below.
PHYSICAL MAPS
Maps showing natural features of the earth such as
mountains, plateaus, plains, rivers, oceans etc. are
called physical or relief maps.
POLITICAL MAPS
Maps showing cities, towns and villages, and different
countries and states of the world with their boundaries
are called political maps.
THEMATIC MAPS
Some maps focus on specific information; such as road
N
S
2018-19

24
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Let’s Do
Look at the
Figure 4.1.
There is a scale.
It may be used for
measuring distance
between places. For
example the distance
between the well and the
tree is 5 cm. It means
that the actual distance
is 50 metres. Now the
distance between the PO
(A) to Karim’s house (E)
is 12 cm. It means 120
metres on the ground but
you can not fly like a bird
directly from E to A. You
will have to walk on the
road. Let us measure the
total walking distance
from E to C, then C to M,
M to B and B to A. Add
all these distances. This
will be the total walking
distance from Karim’s
house to the post office.
maps, rainfall maps, maps showing distribution of
forests, industries etc. are known as thematic maps.
Suitable titles are given on the basis of information
provided in these maps.
There are three Components of Maps – distance,
direction and symbol.
DISTANCE
Maps are drawings, which reduce the entire world or a
part of it to fit on a sheet of paper. Or we can say maps
are drawn to reduced scales. But this reduction is done
very carefully so that the distance between the places
is real. It can only be possible when a small distance
on paper represents a large distance on the ground.
Therefore, a scale is chosen for this purpose. Scale is
the ratio between the actual distance on the ground
and the distance shown on the map. For example, the
distance between your school and your home is 10
km. If you show this 10 km. distance by 2 cm on a
map, it means, 1 cm on the map will show 5 km. on
the ground. The scale of your drawing will be 1cm = 5
km. Thus, scale is very important in any map. If you
know the scale, you will be able to calculate the
distance between any two places on a map.
When large areas like continents or countries are
to be shown on a paper, then we use a small scale. For
example 5 cm. on the map shows 500  km. of the
ground. It is called a small scale map.
When a small area like your village or town is to be
shown on paper, then we use a large scale that is 5
cm. on the map shows 500 metres only on the ground.
It is called a large scale map.
Large scale maps give more information than small
scale maps.
DIRECTION
Most maps contain an arrow marked with the letter
‘N’ at the upper right hand corner. This arrow shows
the north direction. It is called the north line. When
you know the north, you can find out other directions,
for example east, west and south. There are four major
2018-19

25
MAPS
Figure 4.1 : Map of a village
directions, North, South, East and West {Figure 4.2
(a)}. They are called cardinal points. Other four
intermediate directions are north-east (NE), south-
east(SE), south-west (SW) and north-west (NW). We
can locate any place more accurately with the help of
these intermediate directions.
Find out the following directions from the
Figure 4.1: (a) The direction of the Community Centre,
the playground from Vikas’s house (b) the direction
of school from shops.
We can find out the direction of a place with the
help of a compass. It is an instrument used to find
out main directions. Its magnetic needle always points
towards north-south direction {Figure 4.2 (b)}.
Figure 4.2 (a) : Cardinal Directions
Figure 4.2 (b) : A compass
N
S
2018-19

26
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Various colours are used for the same purpose. For
example, generally blue is used for showing water
bodies, brown for mountain, yellow for plateau and
green is used for plains.
SYMBOLS
It is the third important component of a map. It is not
possible to draw on a map the actual shape and size of
different features such as buildings, roads, bridges,
trees, railway lines or a well. So, they are shown by
using certain letters, shades, colours, pictures and lines
These symbols give a lot of  information in a limited
space. With the use of these symbols, maps can be
drawn easily and are simple to read. Even if you don’t
know the language of an area and therefore cannot
ask someone for directions, you can collect information
from maps with the help of these symbols. Maps have
a universal language that can be understood by all.
There is an international agreement regarding the use
of these symbols. These are called conventional
symbols. Some of the conventional symbols are shown
in the Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.3 : Conventional Symbols
2018-19

27
MAPS
Figure 4.4 : Sunderpur village and its surrounding areas
Look at the Figure 4.4 and
find out :
(i)In which direction is
the river flowing?
(ii)What kind of road
passes by the side of
village Dumri?
(iii)On what type of
railway line is
Sunderpur situated ?
(iv)On which side of the
railway bridge is the
police station
situated?
(v)On which side of the
railway line do the
following lie :
(a)Chhatri
(b)Church  (c) Pond
(d)Mosque  (e) River
(f)Post and
Telegraph Office
(g)Graveyard
SKETCH
A sketch is a drawing mainly based on memory and
spot observation and not to scale. Sometimes a rough
drawing is required of an area to tell where a particular
place is located with respect to other places. Suppose,
you want to go to your friend’s house, but you don’t
know the way. Your friend may make a rough drawing
to show the way to his house. Such a rough drawing
is drawn without scale, and is called a sketch map.
PLAN
A plan is a drawing of a small area on a large scale. A
large-scale map gives lot of  information, but there are
certain things which we may sometimes want to know
for example the length and breadth of a room, which
can’t be shown in a map. At that time, we can refer
drawings drawn to scale called a plan.
Let’s Do Visit web portal School Bhuvan-NCERT URL-
http://bhuvan.nrsc.gov.in/governance/mhrd-ncert and
draw online neighbourhood map on satellite imageries.
2018-19

28
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
1.Answer the following questions briefly.
(a)What are the three components of a map?
(b)What are the four cardinal directions?
(c)What do you mean by the term ‘the scale of the map’?
(d)How are maps more helpful than a globe?
(e)Distinguish between a map and a plan.
(f)Which map provides detailed information?
(g)How do symbols help in reading maps?
2.Tick the correct answers.
(a)Maps showing distribution of forests are
(i) Physical map(ii) Thematic Map(iii) Political map
(b)The blue colour is used for showing
(i) Water bodies(ii) Mountains(iii) Plains
(c)A compass is used –
(i)To show symbols
(ii)To find the main direction
(iii)To measure distance
(d)A scale is necessary
(i) For a map(ii) For a sketch(iii) For symbols
1.Draw a plan of your classroom and show the teacher’s table, blackboard,
desks, door and windows.
2.Draw a sketch of your school and locate the following :
(a)the principal’s room(b) your classroom
(c)the playground(d) the library
(e)some big trees(f) drinking water
2018-19

29
MAPS
1.Make the plan (in the space given below) of a fun-park where you can enjoy
several activities : for example swings, slides, see-saw, merry-go-round,
boating, swimming, looking into funny mirrors, etc. or anything else that you
can think of.
2018-19

MAJOR DOMAINS OF THE EARTH
As you have read in the first chapter, the earth is the
only planet which has life. Human beings can live here
because the life sustaining elements of land, water and
air are present on the earth.
The surface of the earth is a complex zone in which
three main components of the environment meet,
overlap and interact. The solid portion of the earth on
which we live is called the Lithosphere. The gaseous
layers that surround the earth, is the Atmosphere,
where oxygen, nitrogen, carbondioxide and other  gases
are found. Water covers a very big area of the earth’s
surface and this area is called the Hydrosphere. The
Hydrosphere comprises water in all its forms, that is,
ice, water and water vapour.
The Biosphere is the narrow zone where we find
land, water and air together, which contains all forms
of life.
LITHOSPHERE
The solid portion of the earth is called the Lithosphere.
It comprises the rocks of the earth’s crust and the thin
layers of soil that contain nutrient elements which
sustain organisms.
There are two main divisions of the earth’s surface.
The large landmasses are known as the continents
and the huge water bodies are called the ocean basins.
All the oceans of the world are connected with one
another. Look at the map of the world (Figure 5.1). Are
all the land masses connected with one another?
The level of seawater remains the same everywhere.
Elevation of land is measured from the level of the sea,
which is taken as zero.
5
5
Word Origin
In the Greek
language, Lithos
means Stone; Atmos
means Vapour;
Hudor means Water;
and Bios means Life.
Can you make words using
the above?
2018-19

31
MAJOR DOMAINS OF THE EARTH
Figure 5.1 : The World : Continents and Oceans
SOUTHERN OCEAN
2018-19

32
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
The highest mountain peak Mt. Everest is 8,848
metres above the sea level. The greatest depth of 11,022
metres is recorded at Mariana Trench in the Pacific
Ocean. Could you imagine that depth of sea is much
more than the highest point?
Continents
There are seven major continents. These are separated
by large water bodies. These continents are – Asia,
Europe, Africa, North America, South America,
Australia and Antarctica. Look at the map of the world
(Figure 5.1) and notice that the greater part of the land
mass lies in the Northern Hemisphere.
Asia is the largest continent. It covers about one-
third of the total land area of the earth. The continent
lies in the Eastern Hemisphere. The Tropic of Cancer
passes through this continent. Asia is separated from
Europe by the Ural mountains on the west (Figure
5.1). The combined landmass of Europe and Asia is
called the Eurasia (Europe + Asia).
Europe is much smaller than Asia. The continent
lies to the west of Asia. The Arctic Circle passes through
it. It is bound by water bodies on three sides. Look at
the map of the world and locate it.
Africa is the second largest continent after Asia.
The Equator or 0
0
 latitude runs almost through the
middle of the continent. A large part of Africa lies in
the Northern Hemisphere. Look at the Figure 5.1; you
will find that it is the only continent through which
the Tropic of Cancer, the Equator and the Tropic of
Capricorn pass.
The Sahara Desert, the world’s largest hot desert,
is located in Africa. The continent is bound on all sides
by oceans and seas. Look at the world map (Figure 5.1).
You will notice that the world’s longest river the Nile,
flows through Africa. Notice where the Equator, the
Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn pass in
the map of Africa.
North America is the third largest continent of the
world. It is linked to South America by a very narrow
strip of land called the Isthmus of Panama. The
continent lies completely in the Northern and Western
Hemisphere. Three oceans surround this continent.
Can you name these oceans?
Do you know?
Edmund Hillary
(New Zealand)
and Tenzing Norgay
Sherpa (India) were the
first men to climb the
highest mountain peak Mt.
Everest on the planet
earth on 29
th
 May, 1953.
Junko Tabei (Japan)
was the first woman to
reach the summit on 16th
May, 1975. The first
Indian woman to climb the
highest peak on 23
rd
 May,
1984 was Bachendri Pal.
2018-19

33
MAJOR DOMAINS OF THE EARTH
South America lies
mostly in the Southern
Hemisphere. Which two
oceans surround it on
the east and the west?
The Andes, world’s
longest mountain
range, runs through its
length from north to
south (Figure 5.1).
South America has the
world’s largest river, the
Amazon.
Australia is the
smallest continent that
lies entirely in the
Southern Hemisphere.
It is surrounded on all
sides by the oceans and
seas. It is called an
island continent.
Antarctica, completely in the Southern Hemisphere,
is a huge continent. The South Pole lies almost at the
centre of this continent. As it is located in the South
Polar Region, it is permanently covered with thick ice
sheets. There are no permanent human settlements.
Many countries have research stations in Antarctica.
India also has research stations there. These are named
as Maitri and Dakshin Gangotri.
HYDROSPHERE
The earth is called the blue planet. More than 71 per
cent of the earth is covered with water and 29 per
cent is with land. Hydrosphere consists of water in
all its forms. As running water in oceans and rivers
and in lakes, ice in glaciers, underground water and
the water vapour in atmosphere, all comprise  the
hydrosphere.
More than 97% of the Earth’s water is found in the
oceans and is too salty for human use. A large
proportion of the rest of the water is in the form of
icesheets and glaciers or under the ground and a very
small percentage is available as fresh water for human
Figure 5.2 : Isthmus and Strait
Name the Strait
between India
and Sri Lanka.
2018-19

34
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
use. Hence, despite being a ‘blue planet’ we face a
shortage of water!!
Oceans
Oceans are the major part of hydrosphere. They are
all interconnected.
The ocean waters are always moving. The three chief
movements of ocean waters are the waves, the tides
and the ocean currents. The five major oceans are the
Pacific Ocean, the Atlantic Ocean, the Indian Ocean,
the Southern Ocean and the Arctic Ocean, in order of
their size (Figure 5.1).
The Pacific Ocean is the largest ocean. It is spread
over one-third of the earth. Mariana Trench, the deepest
part of the earth, lies in the Pacific Ocean. The Pacific
Ocean is almost circular in shape. Asia, Australia,
Figure 5.3 : Comparative size of the continents
Count the squares given in Figure 5.3 and answer the following :
(a) Name the largest continent;  (b) Which is larger –  Europe or Australia?
2018-19

35
MAJOR DOMAINS OF THE EARTH
North and South Americas surround it. Look at the map
and find out the location of the continents around the
Pacific Ocean.
The Atlantic Ocean is the second largest Ocean in
the world. It is ‘S’ shaped. It is flanked by the North
and South Americas on the western side, and Europe
and Africa on the eastern side. The coastline of Atlantic
Ocean is highly indented. This irregular and indented
coastline provides ideal location for natural harbours
and ports. From the point of view of commerce, it is
the busiest Ocean.
The Indian Ocean is the only ocean named after a
country, that is, India. The shape of ocean is almost
triangular. In the north, it is bound by Asia, in the
west by Africa and in the east by Australia.
The Southern Ocean encircles the continent of
Antarctica and extends northward to 60 degrees south
latitude.
The Arctic Ocean is located within the Arctic Circle
and surrounds the North Pole. It is connected with the
Pacific Ocean by a narrow stretch of shallow water
known as Berring strait.  It is bound by northern coasts
of North America and Eurasia.
ATMOSPHERE
The earth is surrounded by a layer of gas called the
atmosphere. This thin blanket of air is an integral
and important aspect of the planet. It provides us with
the air we breathe and protects us from the harmful
effects of sun’s rays.
The atmosphere extends up to a height of about
1,600 kilometres. The atmosphere is divided into five
layers based on composition, temperature and other
properties. These layers starting from earth’s surface
are called the troposphere, the stratosphere, the
mesosphere, the thermosphere and the exosphere.
The atmosphere is composed mainly of nitrogen and
oxygen, which make up about 99 per cent of clean,
dry air. Nitrogen 78 per cent, oxygen 21 per cent and
other gases like carbondioxide, argon and others
comprise 1 per cent by volume. Oxygen is the breath
of life while nitrogen helps in the growth of living
organisms. Carbon dioxide, though present in minute
amount, is important as it absorbs heat radiated by
the earth, thereby keeping the planet warm. It is also
essential for the growth of plants.
The density of the atmosphere varies with height. It
Figure 5.4 : Layers of the Atmosphere
Exosphere
Thermosphere
Mesosphere
Stratosphere
Troposphere
2018-19

36
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
is maximum at the sea level and
decreases rapidly as we go up. You
know, the climbers experience
problems in breathing due to this
decrease in the density of air. They
have to carry with them oxygen
cylinders to be able to breathe at
high altitudes. The temperature also
decreases as we go upwards. The
atmosphere exerts pressure on the
earth. This varies from place to place.
Some areas experience high pressure
and some areas low pressure. Air
moves from high pressure to low pressure. Moving air
is known as wind.
BIOSPHERE – THE DOMAIN OF LIFE
The biosphere is the narrow zone of contact between
the land, water and air. It is in this zone that life, that
is unique to this planet, exists. There are several
Figure 5.6 : The Biosphere
Figure 5.5 : A mountaineer
2018-19

37
MAJOR DOMAINS OF THE EARTH
1.Answer the following questions briefly.
(a)What are the four major domains of the earth?
(b)Name the major continents of the earth.
(c)Name the two continents that lie entirely in the Southern Hemisphere.
(d)Name the different layers of atmosphere.
(e)Why is the earth called the ‘blue planet’?
(f)Why is the Northern Hemisphere called the Land Hemisphere?
(g)Why is the Biosphere important for living organisms?
species of organisms that vary in size from microbes
and bacteria to huge mammals. All the living
organisms including humans are linked  to each other
and to the biosphere for survival.
The organisms in the biosphere may broadly be
divided into the plant kingdom and the animal
kingdom. The three domains of the earth interact with
each other and affect each other in some way or the
other. For example, cutting of forests for fulfilling our
needs of wood, or clearing land for agriculture may
lead to fast removal of soil from slopes. Similarly earth’s
surface may be changed due to natural calamities like
earthquakes. For example, there could be submergence
of land, as happened in the case of Tsunami recently.
Parts of Andaman & Nicobar islands were submerged
under water. Discharge of waste material into lakes
and rivers makes the water unsuitable for human use.
It also damages other forms of life.
Emission from industries, thermal power plants
and vehicles, pollute the air. Carbon dioxide (CO
2
) is
an important constituent of air. But increase in the
amount of CO
2
 leads to increase in global temperatures.
This is termed as global warming. There is thus, a
need to limit the use of resources of the earth to
maintain the balance of nature between the domains
of the lithosphere, the atmosphere and the
hydrosphere.
2018-19

38
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
2.Tick the correct answers.
(a)The mountain range that separates Europe from Asia is
(i) the Andes(ii) the Himalayas(iii) the Urals
(b)The continent of North America is linked to South America by
(i) an Isthmus(ii) a Strait(iii) a Canal
(c)The major constituent of atmosphere by per cent is
(i) Nitrogen(ii) Oxygen(iii) Carbon dioxide
(d)The domain of the earth consisting of solid rocks is
(i) the Atmosphere(ii) the Hydrosphere(iii) the Lithosphere
(e)Which is the largest continent?
(i)  Africa(ii) Asia(iii) Australia
3.Fill in the blanks.
(a)The deepest point on the earth is _____________  in the Pacific Ocean.
(b)The _____________ Ocean is named after a country.
(c)The _____________ is a narrow contact zone of land, water and air that
supports life.
(d)The continents of Europe and Asia together are known as _____________.
(e)The highest mountain peak on the earth is  _____________.
1.Cut the outline of the continents from an outline map of the world and
arrange them according to their decreasing sizes.
2.Cut the outline of the continents from an outline map of the world and try
to fit them together as a jig-saw puzzle.
3.Collect pictures of expeditions to the Himalayas. Write about the kind of
equipment carried by the climbers for protection against sunshine,
temperature and the lack of air.
Map Skills
1.On the outline map of the world, mark the following :
Europe, Asia, Antarctica, South America, Australia, Indian Ocean, Pacific
Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, Ural Mountains and Isthmus of Panama.
2018-19

6
6
MAJOR LANDFORMS OF THE EARTH
You must have seen 
some of the landform features as
shown in the Figure 6.1 below. You will notice that the
surface of the earth is not the same everywher
e. The
earth has an infinite variety of landforms. Some parts
of the lithosphere may be rugged and some flat.
These landforms are a result of two processes. You
will  be  amazed  to  know  that  the  ground  you  are
standing  on  is  slowly  moving.  Within  the  earth,  a
continuous movement is taking place. The first, or the
internal process leads to the upliftment and sinking
of the earth’s surface at several places.
Do you know?
A  hill  is  a  land
surface      that
rises higher than
the    surrounding    area.
Generally,  a  steep  hill  with
an elevation of more than 600
metres  is  termed  as  a
mountain.   Name   some
mountains  with  a  height  of
more  than  8,000  metres.
Figure 6.1 : Landforms
2018-19

40
THE  EARTH  :  OUR  HABITAT
The second, or the external process is the continuous
wearing down and rebuilding of the land surface. The
wearing away of the earth’s surface is called er
osion.
The surface is being lowered by the process of erosion
and  rebuilt  by  the  process  of  deposition.  These  two
processes  are  carried  out  by  running  water,  ice  and
wind.  Broadly,  we  can  group  different  landforms
depending  on  elevation  and  slope  as  mountains,
plateaus and plains.
MOUNTAINS
A  mountain  is  any  natural  elevation  of  the  earth
surface. The mountains may have a small summit and
a  broad  base.  It  is  considerably  higher  than  the
surrounding  area.  Some  mountains  are  even  higher
than the clouds. As you go higher, the climate becomes
colder.
In some mountains, there are permanently frozen
rivers of ice. They are called glaciers. There are some
mountains you cannot see as they are under the sea.
Because  of  harsh  climate,  less  people  live  in  the
mountain areas. Since the slopes are steep, less land
is available for farming.
Figure 6.2 : Fold Mountains (Himalayas)
Let’s  Do
Making    of    a
Mountain  :
1.All  you  require  is  a
pile  of  paper.
2.  Put  the  papers  on
your  table.
3.Push   the   papers
from  both  sides  by
your  hands.
4.  The  sheet  will  be
folded  and  rise  into
a  peak.
5.  You  have  made  a
mountain!
In  the  same  process
our  Himalayas  and
the     Alps     were
formed!
A Fold Mountain
Crust
2018-19

41
MAJOR  LANDFORMS  OF  THE  EARTH
Mountains  may  be  arranged  in  a  line  known  as
range. Many mountain systems consist of a series of
parallel ranges extending over hundreds of kilometres.
The Himalayas, the Alps and the Andes are mountain
ranges of Asia, Europe and South America, respectively
(Figure  5.1).  Mountains  vary  in  their  heights  and
shape.
There  are  three  types  of  mountains-  Fold
Mountains,  Block  Mountains  and  the  Volcanic
Mountains
. The Himalayan Mountains and the Alps
are young fold mountains with rugged relief and high
conical peaks. The Aravali range in India is one of the
oldest fold mountain systems in the world. The range
has considerably worn down due to the processes of
erosion. The Appalachians in North America and the
Ural mountains in Russia (Figure 5.1) have rounded
features  and  low  elevation.  They  are  very  old  fold
mountains.
Block  Mountains  are
created when large areas are
broken   and   displaced
vertically. The uplifted blocks
are termed as horsts and the
lowered  blocks  are  called
graben.  The  Rhine  valley
and the Vosges mountain in
Europe are examples of such
mountain  systems.  Locate
them  on  the  world  map  in
the atlas and find out some
more examples of this type
of landforms.
Volcanic  mountains  are
formed  due  to  volcanic
activity.  Mt.Kilimanjaro  in  Africa  and  Mt.Fujiyama
in Japan are examples of such mountains.
Mountains  are  very  useful.  The  mountains  are  a
stor
ehouse
 of water. Many rivers have their source in
the  glaciers
  in  the  mountains.  Reservoirs  are  made
and the water is harnessed for the use of people. Water
from  the  mountains  is  also  used  for  irrigation  and
generation of hydro-electricity. The river valleys and
terraces are ideal for cultivation of crops. Mountains
have  a  rich  variety  of  flora  and  fauna.  The  forests
provide  fuel,  fodder,  shelter  and  other  products  like
Do you know?
Mauna        Kea
(Hawaii)    in  the
Pacific  Ocean  is
an  undersea  mountain.  It
is  higher  than  Mount
Everest   being   10,205
metres  high.
Figure 6.3 : A Block Mountain
2018-19

42
THE  EARTH  :  OUR  HABITAT
gum,  raisins,  etc.  Mountains  provide  an  idyllic  site
for tourists. They visit the mountains for their scenic
beauty. Several sports like paragliding, hang gliding,
river rafting and skiing are popular in the mountains.
Can  you  name  some  places  in  the  Himalayas
associated with these sports?
PLATEAUS
A plateau is an elevated flat land. It is
a  flat-topped  table  land  standing
above  the  surrounding  area.  A
plateau may have one or more sides
with  steep  slopes.  The  height  of
plateaus  often  varies  from  few
hundred metres to several thousand
metres. Plateaus, like mountains may
be young or old. The Deccan plateau
in India is one of the oldest plateaus.
The  East  African  Plateau  in  Kenya,
Tanzania  and  Uganda  and  the
Western plateau of Australia are other
examples. The Tibet plateau (Figure 5.1, p.31) is the
highest plateau in the world with a height of 4,000 to
6,000 metres above the mean sea level.
Plateaus are very useful because they are rich in
mineral deposits. As a result, many of the mining areas
in  the  world  are  located  in  the  plateau  areas.  The
Figure 6.4 : A Volcanic Mountain
Can you name this sport?
Figure 6.5 : Plateau
2018-19

43
MAJOR  LANDFORMS  OF  THE  EARTH
African plateau is famous for gold and diamond mining. In India huge reserves of
iron, coal and manganese are found in the Chhotanagpur plateau.
In the plateau areas, there may be several waterfalls as the river falls from a
great height. In India, the Hundru falls in the Chhotanagpur plateau on the river
Subar
narekha  and  the  Jog  falls  in  Karnataka  ar
e  examples  of  such  waterfalls.
The lava plateaus are rich in black soil that are fertile and good for cultivation.
Many plateaus have scenic spots and are of great attraction to tourists.
PLAINS
Plains  are  large  stretches  of  flat  land.  They  are,  generally,  not  more  than  200
metres  above  mean  sea  level.  Some  plains  are  extremely  level.  Others  may  be
slightly rolling and undulating. Most of the plains are formed by rivers and their
tributaries. The rivers flow down the slopes of mountains and erode them. They
carry forward the eroded material. Then they deposit their load consisting of stones,
sand and silt along their courses and in their valleys. It is from these deposits that
plains are formed.
Generally, plains are very fertile. Construction of transport network is easy.
Thus, these plains are very thickly-populated regions of the world. Some of the
largest plains made by the rivers are found in Asia and North America. For example,
in Asia, these plains are formed by the Ganga and the Brahmaputra in India and
the Yangtze in China.
Plains are the most useful areas for human habitation. There is great concentration
of people as more flat land is available for building houses, as well as for cultivation.
Because of fertile soils, the land is highly productive for cultivation. In India too,
the Indo-Gangetic plains are the most densely populated regions of the country.
Figure 6.6 : Plains
2018-19

44
THE  EARTH  :  OUR  HABITAT
LANDFORMS AND 
THE PEOPLE
Humans  have  been  living  on
different  kinds  of  landforms  in
different  ways.  Life  is  difficult  in
mountainous areas. Plains provide
much better conditions. It is easy
to grow crops, build a house or a
road in a plain than a mountain.
Can you point out some differences
in the ways people live on different
kinds  of  landforms?  Sometimes,
natural calamities such as earthquakes, volcanic eruption,
storms and floods cause widespread destruction. Huge loss
of life and property takes place. By creative awareness about
such incidences we may lower the risks.
You  may  find  out  from  your  own  surroundings  in    how
many ways we use the land and water. Quite often we use
the  land  in  a  wasteful  manner,  for  example  constructing
houses  on  a  fertile  land.  Similarly  we  throw  garbage  on
land or in water making them dirty. We should avoid using
such important gifts of nature in a careless manner.  The
available land is not only for our use. It is our duty to leave
the earth a better place for future generations as well.
1.Look   carefully   at
photograph nos. 1-10.
Write  one  sentence
about  each  of  the
photograph.
2.Name  the  landform
features shown in the
photograph nos. 1,2 and 7.
3.What  appears  to  be  the  main  use
of  this  land?  (Photograph  no.  9)
4.What  activities  do  you  see  in  the
photograph nos. 3,6,8 and 9.
Figure 6.7 : Rope Bridge
(Arunachal Pradesh)
Do you know?
Swachh Bharat Mission:
Healthy  mind  lives  in
healthy  body  and  for  a
healthy    body    clean
environment  particularly
clean  water,  air  and
hygienic surroundings are
pre-requisites.  Swachh
Bharat     Mission,     a
government   of   India
Programme    aims    to
achieve all these for people.
Figure 6.8 : A polluted river
2018-19

45
MAJOR  LANDFORMS  OF  THE  EARTH
5.What  type  of  houses  do  you  see
in photograph nos. 4 and 5.
6.Name  the  water  sports/games
shown in photograph nos. 3 & 8.
7.Name  two  means  of  transport
shown in photograph nos. 1 and 10.
2018-19

46
THE  EARTH  :  OUR  HABITAT
1.Answer the following questions briefly.
(a)What are the major landforms?
(b)What is the difference between a mountain and a plateau?
(c)What are the different types of mountains?
(d)How are mountains useful to man?
(e)How are plains formed?
(f)Why are the river plains thickly populated?
(g)Why are mountains thinly populated?
2.Tick the correct answers.
(a)The mountains differ from the hills in terms of
(i) elevation(ii) slope(iii) aspect
(b)Glaciers are found in
(i) the mountains(ii) the plains(iii) the plateaus
(c)The Deccan Plateau is located in
(i) Kenya(ii) Australia(iii) India
(d)The river Yangtze flows in
(i) South America(ii) Australia(iii) China
(e)An important mountain range of Europe is
(i) the Andes(ii) the Alps(iii) the Rockies
3.Fill in the blanks.
1.A ___________ is an unbroken flat or a low-level land.
2.The  Himalayas  and  the  Alps  are  examples  of  _______________types  of
mountains.
3._____________ areas are rich in mineral deposits.
4.The _________________ is a line of mountains.
5.The ____________areas are most productive for farming.
1.What kind of landforms are found in your state? Based on the reading of this
chapter, say how they are of use to the people.
Map Skills
1.On an outline map of the world, mark the following :
(a)Mountain ranges: Himalayas, Rockies and Andes.
(b)Plateau : Tibet.
2018-19

7
7
OUR COUNTRY – INDIA
India is a country of vast geographical expanse. In the
north, it is bound by the lofty Himalayas. The Arabian
Sea in the west, the Bay of Bengal in the east and the
Indian Ocean in the south, wash the shores of the
Indian peninsula.
India has an area of about 3.28 million sq. km. The
north-south extent from Kashmir to Kanyakumari is
about 3,200 km. And the east-west extent from
Arunachal Pradesh to Kuchchh is about 2,900 km.
The lofty mountains, the Great Indian Desert, the
Northern Plains, the uneven plateau surface and the
coasts and islands present a diversity of landforms.
There is a great variety in the climate, vegetation,
wildlife as well as in the language and culture. In this
diversity, we find unity that is reflected in traditions
that bind us as one nation. India has a population of
more than one hundred twenty crores since the
year 2011. It is the second most populous country of
the world after China.
LOCATIONAL SETTING
India is located in the northern hemisphere. The Tropic
of Cancer (23°30
'
N) passes almost halfway through the
country (Figure 7.2). From south to north, main land
of India extends between 8°4
'
N and 37°6
'
N latitudes.
From west to east, India extends between 68°7
'
E and
97°25
'
E longitudes. If we divide the world into eastern
and western hemispheres, which hemisphere would
India belong to? Due to great longitudinal extent of
about 29°, there could be a wide differences in local
time of places located at two extreme points of India. As
such, the difference between these two points would be of
The peninsula is a piece
of land that is
surrounded by water on
three sides (figure 6.1).
Do you know?
Large countries
which stretch
extensively from
east to west do not have
a single Standard Time
for the whole country.
The USA and Canada
have seven and six time
zones respectively. Do you
remember how many
time zones are there in
Russia?
2018-19

48
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Figure 7.1 : India and its neighbouring countries
about two hours. As you have learnt earlier, the local time changes by four minutes
for every one degree of longitude. The sun rises about two hours earlier in the east
(Arunachal Pradesh) than in the west (Gujarat). You have already read earlier, why
the local time of longitude of 82°30
'
E has been taken as the Indian Standard Time.
This meridian or longitude is also termed as the Standard Meridian of India.
INDIA’S NEIGHBOURS
There are seven countries that share land boundaries with India. Find out names
2018-19

49
OUR COUNTRY – INDIA
* Telangana became 29th state of India in June 2014
Figure 7.2 : Political map of India
2018-19

50
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Figure 7.3 : India : Physical Divisions
of these countries from the Figure 7.1. How many of these countries do not have
access to any ocean or sea? Across the sea to the south, lie our island neighbours—
Sri Lanka and Maldives. Sri Lanka is separated from India by the Palk Strait.
POLITICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS
India is a vast country. For administrative purposes, the country is divided into 29
2018-19

51
OUR COUNTRY – INDIA
States and 7 Union Territories (Appendix-I). Telangana
became the 29th state of India on 2 June 2014. It was
previously a part of Andhra Pradesh. Delhi is the
national capital. The states have been formed mainly
on the basis of languages. Rajasthan is the largest
state and Goa is the smallest state in terms of area.
The states are further divided into districts.
PHYSICAL DIVISIONS
India is marked by a diversity of physical features such
as mountains, plateaus, plains, coasts and islands.
Standing as sentinels in the north are the lofty snow-
capped Himalayas. Him+alaya mean ‘the abode of
snow’. The Himalayan mountains are divided into three
main parallel ranges. The northernmost is the Great
Himalaya or Himadri. The world’s highest peaks are
located in this range. Middle Himalaya or Himachal
lies to the south of Himadri. Many popular hill stations
are situated here. Find out the names of five hill
stations. The Shiwalik is the southernmost range.
The Northern Indian plains lie to the south of the
Himalayas. They are generally level and flat. These are
formed by the alluvial deposits laid down by the rivers–
the Indus, the Ganga, the Brahmaputra and their
tributaries. These river plains  provide fertile land for
cultivation. That is the reason for high concentration of
population in these plains.
In the western part of India lies the Great Indian desert.
It is a dry, hot and sandy stretch of land. It has very little
vegetation.
To the south of northern plains lies the Peninsular
plateau. It is triangular in shape. The relief is highly
uneven. This is a region with numerous hill ranges and
valleys. Aravali hills, one of the oldest ranges of the world,
border it on the north-west side. The Vindhyas and the
Satpuras are the important ranges. The rivers Narmada
and Tapi flow through these ranges. These are west-flowing
rivers that drain into the Arabian Sea. The Western Ghats
or Sahyadris border the plateau in the west and the
Eastern Ghats provide the eastern boundary. While the
Western Ghats are almost continuous, the Eastern Ghats
are broken and uneven (Figure 7.3). The plateau is rich
in minerals like coal and iron-ore.
To the West of the Western Ghats and the East of
Eastern Ghats lie the Coastal plains. The western
Alluvial deposits : These
are very fine soils,
brought by rivers and
deposited in the river
basins.
Tributary : A river or
stream which contributes
its water to a main river
by discharging it into
main river from either
side (Figure 6.1).
Let’s Do
Many girls
are named
after rivers
eg. Yamuna, Mandakini,
and Kaveri. Do you know
anyone in your locality
who is named after a
river? Ask your parents
and others and make a
list of such names.
Could you also find
other names related to
water e.g. Shabnam?
Do you know?
The Ganga and
the Brahma-
putra form the
world’s largest delta, the
Sundarbans delta. The
delta is triangular in
shape. It is an area of
land formed at the mouth
of the river (Where rivers
enter the sea, that point
is called the mouth of the
river, Figure 6.1).
2018-19

52
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
Do you know?
Corals are
skeletons of
tiny marine
animals called Polyps.
When the living polyps
die, their skeletons are
left. Other poplyps grow
on top of the hard
skeleton which grows
higher and higher, thus
forming the coral islands.
Figure 7.4 shows Coral
islands.
Figure 7.4 : Coral Islands
coastal plains are very narrow. The eastern Coastal plains are much broader. There
are a number of east flowing rivers. The rivers Mahanadi, Godavari, Krishna and
Kaveri drain into the Bay of Bengal. These rivers have formed fertile deltas at their
mouth. The Sunderban delta is formed where the Ganga and Brahmaputra flow
into the Bay of Bengal.
Danger Waters
Danger Waters
2018-19

53
OUR  COUNTRY  –  INDIA
2018-19

54
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
1.Answer the following questions briefly.
(a)Name the major physical divisions of India.
(b)India shares its land boundaries with seven countries. Name them.
(c)Which two major rivers fall into the Arabian Sea?
(d)Name the delta formed by the Ganga and the Brahmaputra.
(e)How many States and Union Territories are there in India? Which states
have a common capital?
(f)Why do a large number of people live in the Northern plains?
(g)Why is Lakshadweep known as a coral island?
2.Tick the correct answers.
(a)The southernmost Himalayas are known as
(i) Shiwaliks(ii) Himadri(iii) Himachal
(b)Sahyadris is also known as
(i) Aravali(ii) Western Ghats(iii) Himadri
(c)The Palk Strait lies between the countries
(i)Sri Lanka and Maldives
(ii)India and Sri Lanka
(iii)India and Maldives
(d)The Indian islands in the Arabian Sea are known as
(i)Andaman and Nicobar Islands
(ii)Lakshadweep Islands
(iii)Maldives
Two groups of islands also form part of India.
Lakshadweep Islands are located in the Arabian Sea.
These are coral islands located off the coast of Kerala.
The Andaman and the Nicobar Islands lie to the
southeast of the Indian mainland in the Bay of Bengal.
Do you know which group of islands were affected by
the Tsunami in 2004? Find out through newspaper
reports and by speaking to people how in different
ways people faced this challenge when Tsunami struck
the Indian coast. Tsunami is a huge sea wave generated
due to an earthquake on the sea floor.
2018-19

55
OUR COUNTRY – INDIA
(e)The oldest mountain range in India is the
(i) Aravali hills(ii) Western ghats(iii) Himalayas
3.Fill in the blanks.
(a)India has an area of about ________________.
(b)The Greater Himalayas are also known as_________________.
(c)The largest state in India in terms of area is__________________.
(d)The river Narmada falls into the __________________ sea.
(e)The latitude that runs almost halfway through India is ___________.
Map skills
1.On an outline map of India, mark the following.
(a)Tropic of Cancer
(b)Standard Meridian of India
(c)State in which you live
(d)Andaman Islands and Lakshadweep Islands
(e)Western Ghats and Eastern Ghats
2018-19

8
8
INDIA : CLIMATE,
VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE
You read in newspapers daily and watch on T.V. or
hear others talking about weather. You must know
that weather is about day to day changes in the
atmosphere. It includes changes in temperature,
rainfall and sunshine etc. For example, as such it may
be hot or cold; sunny or cloudy; windy or calm. You
must have noticed that when it is hot continuously for
several days you don’t need any warm clothing. You
also like to eat or drink cold things. In contrast there
are days together, you feel cold without woollen clothes
when it is very windy  and chilly, you would like to
have something hot to eat.
Broadly, the major seasons recognised in India are:
•Cold Weather Season (Winter) December to
February
•Hot Weather Season (Summer) March to May
•Southwest Monsoon Season (Rainy)
June to September
•Season of Retreating Monsoon (Autumn) October
and November
COLD WEATHER SEASON OR WINTER
During the winter season, the sun rays do not fall
directly in the region. As a result the temperatures are
quite low in northern India.
HOT WEATHER SEASON OR SUMMER
In the hot weather season sun rays more or less directly
fall in this region. Temperature becomes very high.
Hot and dry winds called loo, blow during the day.
2018-19

57
INDIA : CLIMATE, VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE
Let’s have fun :
1.People in all parts of our country drink delicious
cool drinks called Sharbat made from fruits
available in their regions. They are excellent
thirst-quenchers and protect our bodies from the
ill-effect of the harsh ‘loo’. Have you tried
‘Sharbat’, made from raw mango, bel, lemon,
tamarind, kokum, phalsa, watermelon and
buttermilk made from curds; for example
chhaachh, mattha, mori, chash, etc? Many make
banana and mango milkshakes too.
2.After a hot summer, the first rains bring much
joy. All our languages have melodious songs on
‘rains’. They sound happy and bring cheer. Learn
two songs on rains and sing them together.
Write or collect five poems on rains.
Ask your friends, neighbours and family
members for names for rains and other seasons
in different languages. For instance,
Varsha–  HindiPous –  Marathi
Barish–  UrduBorsha –  Bengali
SOUTH WEST MONSOON SEASON OR  RAINY SEASON
This season is marked by the onset and advance of
monsoon. The winds  blow from Arabian Sea and Bay
of Bengal towards  the land. They carry moisture with
them. When these winds strike the mountain barriers,
rainfall occurs.
SEASON OF RETREATING MONSOONS OR AUTUMN
Winds move back from the mainland to  the Bay of
Bengal. This is the season of the retreating monsoons.
The southern parts of India, particularly Tamil Nadu
and Andhra Pradesh receive rainfall in this season.
However, the climate is about the average weather
condition, which have been measured over many years.
The climate of India has broadly been described as
Monsoon type. Monsoon is taken from the Arabic word
‘mausim’, which means seasons. Due to India’s location
in the tropical region, most of the rain is brought by
monsoon winds. Agriculture in India is dependent on
rains. Good monsoons mean adequate rain and a
bountiful crop.
What would happen if
monsoons were weak, or even
worse, failed to occur one year?
Tick () the correct answer.
•Crops will be-
affected/not affected
•The level of the water in a
well will-
come-up/go-down
•Summer will be-
longer/shorter
2018-19

58
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
The climate of a place is affected by its location,
altitude, distance from the sea, and relief. Therefore,
we experience regional differences in the climate of
India. Jaisalmer and Bikaner in the desert of Rajasthan
are very hot, while Drass and Kargil in Jammu and
Kashmir are freezing cold. Coastal places like Mumbai
and Kolkata experience moderate climate. They are
neither too hot nor too cold. Being on the
coast, these places are very humid.
Mawsynram in Meghalaya receives the
world’s highest rainfall, while in a
particular year it might not rain at all in
Jaisalmer in Rajasthan.
NATURAL VEGETATION
We see a variety of plant life in our
surroundings. How nice it is to play in a
field with green grasses. There are also
small plants called bushes and shrubs like
cactus and flowering plants etc. Besides
there are many tall trees some with many
branches and leaves like neem, mango or
some which stand with few leaves such as
palm. The grasses, shrubs and trees, which
grow on their own without interference or
help from human beings are called natural
vegetation. Do you wonder how these differ
from each other. Different types of natural
vegetation are dependent on different
climatic conditions, among which the
amount of rainfall is very important.
Due to varied climatic conditions, India
has a wide range of natural vegetation.
Vegetation of India can be divided into five
types – Tropical evergreen forest, Tropical
deciduous forest, Thorny bushes,
Mountain vegetation and Mangrove
forests.
TROPICAL RAIN FOREST
Tropical Rain Forests occur in the areas
which receive heavy rainfall. They are so
dense that sunlight doesn’t reach the ground.
Many species of trees are found in these forests,
which shed their leaves at different times of the
Let’s Do
On a map of
India, locate
the places
mentioned in the
paragraph.
Figure 8.1 : Tropical Rain Forests
2018-19

59
INDIA : CLIMATE, VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE
year. Therefore, they always appear green and are
called evergreen forest as you may notice in Figure
8.1. Important trees found in these forests are
mahogany, ebony and rosewood. Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, parts of North-Eastern states and
a narrow strip of the Western slope of the Western
Ghats are home of these forests.
TROPICAL DECIDUOUS FORESTS
In a large part of our country we have this type of
forest. These forests are also called monsoon forests.
They are less dense. They shed their leaves at a
particular time of the year. Important trees of these
forests are sal, teak, peepal, neem and shisham. They
are found in Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar,
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Odisha, and in parts of
Maharashtra.
THORNY BUSHES
This type of vegetation is found in dry areas of the
country. The leaves are in the form of spines to reduce
the loss of water. Cactus, khair, babool, keekar are
important and are found in the states of Rajasthan,
Punjab, Haryana, Eastern slopes of Western Ghats and
Gujarat.
Figure 8.2 : Tropical Deciduous Forests
2018-19

60
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
MOUNTAIN VEGETATION
A wide range of species is found in the mountains
according to the variation in height. With increase in
height, the temperature falls. At a height between 1500
Figure 8.3 : Thorny Bushes
metres and 2500 metres most of the trees
are conical in shape. These trees are called
coniferous trees. Chir, Pine and Deodar are
important trees of these forests.
MANGROVE FORESTS
These forests can survive in saline water.
They are found mainly in Sunderbans in
Figure 8.4 : Mountain Vegetation
Figure 8.5 : Mangrove Vegetation
2018-19

61
INDIA : CLIMATE, VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE
West Bengal and in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
Sundari is a well-known species of trees in mangrove
forests after which Sunderbans have been named.
WHY ARE FORESTS NECESSARY?
Forests are very useful for us. They perform various
functions. Plants release oxygen that we breathe and
absorb carbon dioxide. The roots of the plants bind
the soil; thus, they control soil erosion.
Forests provide us with timber for furniture, fuel
wood, fodder, medicinal plants and herbs, lac, honey,
gum, etc.
Forests are the natural habitat of wild life.
Natural vegetation has been destroyed to a large
extent because of the reckless cutting of trees. We
should plant more trees and protect the existing ones
and make people aware of the importance of trees. We
can have special programmes like Van Mahotsav to
involve more people in making our earth green.
Figure 8.6 : What we get from forests
Leela’s parents planted a
sapling of “neem” to
celebrate her birth. On
each birthday, a different
sapling was planted. It was
watered regularly and
protected from severe heat,
cold and animals. Children
took care not to harm it.
When Leela was 20, twenty-
one beautiful trees, stood in
and around her house.
Birds built their nests on
them, flowers bloomed,
butterflies fluttered around
them, children enjoyed
their fruits, swung on their
branches and played in
their shade.
2018-19

62
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
WILD LIFE
Forests are home to a variety of wild life. There are
thousands of species of animals and a large variety of
reptiles, amphibians, mammals, birds, insects and
worms which dwell in the forest.
Figure 8.7 : Wildlife
The tiger is our national animal. It is found in
various parts of the country. Gir forest in Gujarat is
the home of Asiatic lions. Elephants and one-horned
rhinoceroses roam in the forests of Assam. Elephants
are also found in Kerala and Karnataka. Camels and
wild asses are found in the Great Indian desert and
the Rann of Kuchchh respectively. Wild goats, snow
leopards, bears, etc.  are found in the Himalayan
region. Besides these, many other animals are found
in our country such as monkey, wolf, jackal, nilgai,
cheetal, etc.
India is equally rich in bird life. The peacock is our
national bird. Other common birds are parrots,
pigeons, mynah, geese, bulbul and ducks. There are
several bird sanctuaries which have been created to
give birds their natural habitat. These provide the birds
protection from hunters. Can you name five birds that
are commonly found in your area?
2018-19

63
INDIA : CLIMATE, VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE
There are several hundreds of species of snakes found in India. Cobras and
kraits are important among them.
Due to cutting of forests and hunting, several species of wildlife of India are
declining rapidly. Many species have already become extinct.
In order to protect them many national parks, sanctuaries and biosphere reserves
have been set up. The Government has also started Project Tiger and Project
Elephant to protect these animals. Can you name some wildlife sanctuaries of
India and locate them on a map?
You can also contribute in conserving wildlife. You can refuse to buy things
made from parts of the bodies of animals such as their bones, horns, fur, skins,
and feathers. Every year we observe wildlife week in the first week of October, to
create awareness of conserving the habitats of the animal kingdom.
•Why do poachers kill tigers?
•What will happen if tigers vanish from our forests?
•Have you ever visited any tiger reserves or a zoo where
tigers are kept?
?
?
Figure 8.8
2018-19

64
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
1.Answer the following questions briefly.
(a)Which winds bring rainfall in India? Why is it so important?
(b)Name the different seasons in India.
(c)What is natural vegetation?
(d)Name the different types of vegetation found in India.
(e)What is the difference between evergreen forest and deciduous forest?
(f)Why is tropical rainforest also called evergreen forest?
2.Tick the correct answers.
(a)The world’s highest rainfall occurs in
(i) Mumbai(ii) Asansol(iii) Mawsynram
(b)Mangrove forests can thrive in
(i) saline water(ii) fresh water(iii) polluted water
(c)Mahogany and rosewood trees are found in
(i)mangrove forests
(ii)tropical deciduous forests
(iii)tropical evergreen forests
(d)Wild goats and snow leopards are found in
(i)Himalayan region
(ii)Peninsular region
(iii)Gir forests
Figure 8.9 : Stork – a migratory bird
Migratory Birds
Some birds such as Pintail
Duck, Curlews, Flamingo,
Osprey and Little Stint migrate
to our country in winter season
every year. Smallest migratory
bird Little Stint Weighing as
low as 15 gram, from Arctic
region travel over 8000 km to
reach India.
2018-19

65
INDIA : CLIMATE, VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE
(e)During the south west monsoon period, the moisture laden winds
blow from
(i) land to sea(ii) sea to land(iii) plateau to plains
3.Fill in the blanks.
(a)Hot and dry winds known as ________________ blow during the day in the
summers.
(b)The states of Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu receive a great amount of
rainfall during the season of________________.
(c)_____________ forest in Gujarat is the home of ________________.
(d)_____________ is a well-known species of mangrove forests.
(e)____________ are also called monsoon forests.
1.Make a list of trees in your neighbourhood and collect pictures of plants,
animals and birds and paste them in your copy.
2.Plant a sapling near your home and nurture it and write down the changes
you observe for a few months.
3.Does any migratory bird come in your locality? Try to identify that. Be watchful
in the winter season.
4.Visit a zoo in your city or visit a nearby forest or sanctuary with your elders.
Look carefully at the various types of wildlife there.
2018-19

66
THE EARTH : OUR HABITAT
State and Union Territories of India
StateCapitalUnion TerritoryCapital
Andhra PradeshHyderabadAndaman andPort Blair
Nicobar Islands
Arunachal PradeshItanagarChandigarhChandigarh
AssamDispurDadra & Nagar HaveliSilvassa
BiharPatnaDaman & DiuDaman
ChhattisgarhRaipurLakshadweepKavaratti
GoaPanajiPuducherryPuducherry
GujaratGandhi Nagar
HaryanaChandigarhNational CapitalDelhi
Territory of Delhi
Himachal PradeshShimla
Jammu & KashmirSrinagar
JharkhandRanchi
KarnatakaBengaluru
KeralaThiruvananthapuram
Madhya PradeshBhopal
MaharashtraMumbai
ManipurImphal
MeghalayaShillong
MizoramAizawl
NagalandKohima
OdishaBhubaneshwar
PunjabChandigarh
RajasthanJaipur
SikkimGangtok
Tamil NaduChennai
TelanganaHyderabad
UttarakhandDehradun
Uttar PradeshLucknow
TripuraAgartala
West BengalKolkata
APPENDIX I
2018-19

67
INDIA : CLIMATE, VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE
Some Internet Sources for more information
www.sci.edu/public.html
www.si.edu and www.nasm.edu
http://volcanoes.usgs.gov/
discoveryschool.com/dysee
www.futureforests.com/calculators/flightcalculatorshop.asp
www.nationalgeographic.com/earthpulse
http://www.cpcb.nic.in
APPENDIX II
APPENDIX
2018-19